>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MAY 13: THE SEARCH
TO REPLACE FORMER F.B.I.
DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY BEGINS;
CYBERATTACK-- INVESTIGATING ONE
OF THE LARGEST RANSOMWARE HACKS
ON RECORD; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, HOW A SMALL AFRICAN
NATION CAME TO HOST SO MANY
INTERNATIONAL MILITARY BASES.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HAS BEGUN
INTERVIEWING 11 CANDIDATES THE
WHITE HOUSE IS CONSIDERING TO
LEAD THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION.
TODAY, PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID HE
COULD MAKE A "FAST DECISION."
EVEN NEXT WEEK IS "POSSIBLE."
HE CREATED THE VACANCY THIS WEEK
BY FIRING DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY.
AFTER DOING SO, HE CITED BOTH
THE F.B.I.'S ONGOING
INVESTIGATION OF RUSSIAN
MEDDLING INTO THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION AND POSSIBLE COLLUSION
BY TRUMP CAMPAIGN ASSOCIATES AS
WELL AS COMEY'S CONTROVERSIAL
STATEMENTS ABOUT THE CLOSED
INVESTIGATION INTO HILLARY
CLINTON'S USE OF A PRIVATE EMAIL
SERVER WHEN SHE WAS SECRETARY OF
STATE.
ACTING F.B.I. DIRECTOR ANDREW
McCABE WAS ONE OF FOUR
CANDIDATES INTERVIEWED TODAY TO
BE THE NEXT F.B.I. DIRECTOR, A
JOB WITH A TEN-YEAR TERM.
McCABE TOLD CONGRESS THIS WEEK
THAT, CONTRARY TO WHITE HOUSE
ASSERTIONS, COMEY WAS WELL
RESPECTED BY F.B.I. AGENTS UNTIL
THE END.
ANOTHER CANDIDATE IS SAID TO BE
THREE-TERM U.S. SENATOR JOHN
CORNYN, A FORMER TEXAS SUPREME
COURT JUDGE AND ATTORNEY
GENERAL, NOW THE ASSISTANT
REPUBLICAN LEADER IN THE SENATE.
SO ARE ALICE FISHER, FORMERLY
HEAD OF THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
CRIMINAL DIVISION IN THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION; AND MICHAEL
GARCIA, A NEW YORK STATE COURT
OF APPEALS JUDGE, FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR AND FORMER HEAD OF
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT.
IN AN INTERVIEW TO BE BROADCAST
TONIGHT ON FOX NEWS CHANNEL, THE
PRESIDENT DENIES PUBLISHED
REPORTS THAT AT A JANUARY
DINNER, HE HAD ASKED COMEY FOR
HIS "LOYALTY."
>> BUT I DON'T THINK IT WOULD BE
A BAD QUESTION TO ASK.
I THINK LOYALTY TO THE COUNTRY,
LOYALTY TO THE UNITED STATES IS
IMPORTANT, YOU KNOW.
I MEAN, IT DEPENDS HOW YOU
DEFINE "LOYALTY," NUMBER ONE.
NUMBER TWO, I DON'T KNOW HOW
THAT GOT THERE BECAUSE I DIDN'T
ASK THAT QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: MR. TRUMP MADE
NO MENTION OF THE F.B.I. DURING
HIS FIRST COMMENCEMENT SPEECH AS
PRESIDENT TODAY IN LYNCHBURG,
VIRGINIA.
HE ADDRESSED THE GRADUATES OF
THE NATION'S LARGEST CHRISTIAN
UNIVERSITY, LIBERTY COLLEGE, RUN
BY JERRY FALWELL, JR.
FALWELL WAS A CRUCIAL EARLY
EVANGELICAL SUPPORTER OF TRUMP'S
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDACY.
THE PRESIDENT TOLD THE STUDENTS
THEY DON'T NEED LECTURES FROM
WASHINGTON ON HOW TO LEAD THEIR
LIVES.
>> BECAUSE, IN AMERICA, WE DON'T
WORSHIP GOVERNMENT; WE WORSHIP
GOD.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
IT'S WHY WE PROUDLY PROCLAIM WE
ARE ONE NATION UNDER GOD EVERY
TIME WE SAY THE PLEDGE OF
ALLEGIANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: FINANCE
MINISTERS AND CENTRAL BANK
GOVERNORS FROM THE SO-CALLED
GROUP OF SEVEN INDUSTRIAL
NATIONS HAVE FINISHED A TWO-DAY
MEETING IN BARI, ITALY.
WHILE THERE, U.S. TREASURY
SECRETARY STEVE MNUCHIN TOLD THE
G-7 THAT CUTTING THE CORPORATE
TAX RATE IS A TOP U.S. PRIORITY.
THE FINAL COMMUNIQUEÉ SAID
OFFICIALS ARE "WORKING TO
STRENGTHEN THE CONTRIBUTION OF
TRADE TO OUR ECONOMIES."
MNUCHIN SAID THE U.S. IS LOOKING
FOR "BALANCED" DEALS.
>> WE DON'T WANT TO BE
PROTECTIONIST, BUT WE RESERVE
OUR RIGHTS TO BE PROTECTIONIST
TO THE EXTENT THAT WE BELIEVE
THAT TRADE IS NOT FREE AND FAIR.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT TRUMP
IS SCHEDULED TO ATTEND A G-7
SUMMIT IN SICILY, ITALY, IN TWO
WEEKS.
NORTH KOREA HAS LAUNCHED
AN UNIDENTIFIED PROJECTILE,
ACCORDING TO SOUTH KOREA'S NEWS
AGENCY.
IT APPEARS TO BE A BALLISTIC
MISSILE.
IT'S THE NINTH MISSILE LAUNCH ON
FOUR OCCASIONS SINCE PRESIDENT
TRUMP TOOK OFFICE IN JANUARY.
THE TEST CAME ONLY HOURS AFTER A
TOP NORTH KOREAN DIPLOMAT HAD
SAID HER COUNTRY WOULD BE
WILLING TO RESUME NEGOTIATIONS
WITH THE U.S. OVER ITS NUCLEAR
AND MISSILE PROGRAMS WITHOUT
SPECIFYING UNDER WHAT
CONDITIONS.
BEFORE THE MISSILE TEST, THE
STATE DEPARTMENT HAD SAID IN A
WRITTEN STATEMENT, "THE U.S.
WOULD CONSIDER TALKS WITH NORTH
KOREA ONLY IF THE NORTH CEASES
ALL ITS ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES AND
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN THE
REGION."
NORTH KOREA'S LAST TEST FIRING
OF A MISSILE FAILED TWO WEEKS
AGO.
NORTH KOREA HAS CONDUCTED FIVE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTS SINCE
2006.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
HAS DECLARED A NEW OUTBREAK OF
THE DEADLY EBOLA VIRUS IN THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO.
HEALTH OFFICIALS SAID TODAY ONE
MAN IS CONFIRMED DEAD FROM THE
VIRUS AND TEN OTHER CASES ARE
SUSPECTED.
W.H.O. DOCTORS HAVE REACHED THE
OUTBREAK ZONE IN A REMOTE
PROVINCE NEAR THE COUNTRY'S
BORDER WITH CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC.
THE EBOLA OUTBREAK IN WEST
AFRICA THAT PEAKED THREE YEARS
AGO KILLED MORE THAN 11,000
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITISH
OFFICIALS SAY 97% OF HOSPITALS
EFFECTIVELY SHUT DOWN BY A
MASSIVE CYBER ATTACK YESTERDAY
ARE BACK TO NORMAL.
THE RANSOMWARE DISRUPTED HEALTH,
TRANSPORTATION AND TELEPHONE
SYSTEMS ACROSS EUROPE.
AMERICAN COMPANIES, INCLUDING
FEDERAL EXPRESS, SAID THEY WERE
HIT, TOO.
THE HACKERS MAY HAVE EXPLOITED A
VULNERABILITY IN MICROSOFT
WINDOWS SOFTWARE ON OLDER
COMPUTERS, A VULNERABILITY THE
U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
ONCE IDENTIFIED AND TURNED INTO
A CYBER WEAPON.
MICROSOFT IS OFFERING TO MAKE
FIXES FOR FREE.
THE CYBER ATTACK OCCURRED THE
DAY AFTER PRESIDENT TRUMP SIGNED
AN EXECUTIVE ORDER TO REVIEW AND
UPGRADE CYBER PROTECTIONS OF
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INFRASTRUCTURE LIKE ENERGY
GRIDS.
THIS WILL BUILD ON EFFORTS
STARTED BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
IS ONE OF THE ARCHITECTS OF
THOSE DEFENSES: JOHN CARLIN, THE
FORMER ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY,
NOW WITH MORRISON AND FOERSTER.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WHEN YOU STARTED TO SEE THESE
HEADLINES YESTERDAY, WHAT DID
YOU THINK?
>> MAYBE ON A BIGGER SCALE, BUT
IT'S MORE OF THE SAME.
RANSOMWARE ATTACKS HAVE BEEN UP
BY OVER 300% ACCORDING TO F.B.I.
REPORTING SINCE 2016 ALONE.
I TELL YOU, DAY IN, DAY OUT,
BOTH WHEN I WAS IN GOVERNMENT
AND NOW IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, I
TALKED TO COMPANIES WHO HAVE
BEEN HIT BY RANSOMWARE.
>> THIS CODE WAS SOMETHING
WE HAD A COUPLE OF MONTHS'
WARNING ON.
THERE WAS PATCH OUT THERE.
THERE WAS NEWS ARTICLES ABOUT
HOW THIS CODE GOT OUT INTO THE
WILD.
BUT IT COULD BE A LOT WORSE.
>> IT COULD BE WORSE IN A COUPLE
DIFFERENT WAYS.
NUMBER ONE, THE GOOD AND THE BAD
SIDE IS, HEY, THIS WAS SOMETHING
THAT WAS ALREADY KNOWN.
I THINK A LOT OF TIME, A LOT OF
ENERGY, A LOT OF PRINT IS SPENT
TALKING ABOUT THE HIGHEST LEVEL
ACTORS, NATION-STATE ACTORS, BUT
THE FACT IS MOST OF WHAT WE'RE
SEEING TODAY TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF
BY CRIMINAL GROUPS, IT'S NOT THE
HIGHEST LEVEL HACK.
IT'S EXPLOITS LIKE THIS WHERE
THE PATCH WAS RELEASED IN MARCH
2017 BUT A COUPLE THINGS
HAPPENED.
ONE, IT GETS ON TO PEOPLE'S
SYSTEMS THROUGH WHAT'S CALLED
PHISHING OR SPEARFISHING.
THEY SEND YOU AN E-MAIL AND AN
UNWITTING USER INSIDE THE
COMPANY CLICKS ON THE
ATTACHMENT.
THAT'S HOW THE MALWARE GETS IN.
A LOT OF COMPANIES ARE NOT
PATCHING OR UPDATING THEIR
SYSTEMS IN WAYS THAT COULD STOP
KNOWN VULNERABILITIES, LIKE THIS
ONE.
AND NUMBER THREE, ASSUMING THAT
THE WORST CAN HAPPEN, WE NEED
TO MOVE BOTH PRIVATE COMPANIES
AND THE GOVERNMENT TOWARD
THINKING ABOUT RESILIENCE.
WHAT HAPPENS IF THE WORST
HAPPENED, HAVE I BACKED UP MY
INFORMATION IN A WAY I CAN GET
BACK TO DOING BUSINESS?
>> I ALSO WANT TO PIVOT TO THE
EXECUTIVE ORDER THAT THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION JUST SIGNED.
YOUR THOUGHTS ON IT GIVEN THAT
YOU'VE HELPED CRAFT SOME OF THE
CYBER DEFENSE POLICY THAT EXISTS
TODAY.
>> I THOUGHT THE EXECUTIVE ORDER
IS A GOOD STEP IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
THERE ARE A LOT OF REPORTS
ORDERED THROUGH IT, AND ONE
THING I DO WORRY ABOUT GIVEN THE
SCOPE AND SCALE OF THE THREAT WE
CURRENTLY FACE, AS WAS MADE
QUITE VIVIDLY CLEAR OF THIS
MASSIVE 100 -COUNTRY RANSOMWARE
ATTACK, AND WHERE WE'RE NOT
DOING ENOUGH FAST ENOUGH, IN
THAT REPORT IS A CALL FOR A
STUDY TO INCREASE OUR
DETERRENTS.
I THINK VITAL TO THE SOLUTION TO
THIS PROBLEM IS GOING TO BE
DETERRENTS, FIGURING OUT A WAY
TO MAKE BAD GUYS-- BE THEY
TERRORISTS, NATION-STATES OR
CROOKS-- WORRIED ABOUT TAKING
ACTION IN THIS SPACE IN A WAY
THEY SIMPLY AREN'T RIGHT NOW.
>> ONE CONCERN HAS BEEN HOW FAST
GOVERNMENT CAN PRACTICE WHAT IT
PREACHES.
YOU GUYS WERE VERY GOOD AT
GIVING CLEAR GUIDELINES FOR THE
PRIVATE SECTOR, BUT WHEN YOU
THINK OF THE NUMBER OF COMPUTER
SYSTEMS SPREAD OUT THROUGHOUT
GOVERNMENT AND HOW QUICKLY
THEY'RE ABLE TO IMPLEMENT SOME
OF THIS, THEN IT... I DON'T KNOW
HOW LONG THAT'S GOING TO TAKE.
>> I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
IT IS A CONCERN.
I THINK ONE THING THAT WAS GOOD
ABOUT THE APPROACH IN THIS
EXECUTIVE ORDER WAS THE IDEA OF
MAKING THE CABINET SECRETARIES
RESPONSIBLE FOR FIGURING OUT
WHAT THE RISKS ARE AND RANKING
THEM ON THEIR OWN SYSTEMS, AND
THEN MAKING THE WHITE HOUSE
RESPONSIBLE, LOOKING ACROSS
GOVERNMENT TO FIGURE OUT, HEY,
WHAT IS THE TYPE OF ATTACK,
WHAT'S THE TYPE OF MATERIAL THAT
CAUSES THE HIGHEST RISK, SO WE
CAN DEVOTE OUR RESOURCES TO IT.
THAT'S THE SAME APPROACH WE'RE
NOW JUST SEEING PRIVATE
COMPANIES DEPLOY ON THEIR OWN
SYSTEMS, BOTH THE GOVERNMENT AND
THE PRIVATE SECTOR NEED THE MOVE
FASTER IN THAT REGARD, GIVEN
WHAT THE THREATS ARE, AND START
THINKING OF THIS LIKE A RISK
MITIGATION EXERCISE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JOHN CARLIN, THE FORMER
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT MAKES
COMEDIAN W. KAMAU BELL LAUGH?
FIND OUT AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: DJIBOUTI IS A
TINY COUNTRY OF 850,000 PEOPLE
NEAR THE HORN OF AFRICA AND THE
GATEWAY TO THE SUEZ CANAL, ONE
OF THE WORLD'S BUSIEST SHIPPING
ROUTES.
ITS STRATEGIC LOCATION HAS ALSO
MADE DJIBOUTI A PRIZED SPOT FOR
MILITARY BASES.
THERE ARE BASES FROM ITS FORMER
COLONIAL RULER, FRANCE, AS WELL
AS THE UNITED STATES AND NOW
CHINA.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MARTIN
SEEMUNGAL REPORTS ON HOW
DJIBOUTI CAME TO ROLL OUT A
WELCOME MAT TO THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: DJIBOUTI IS ONE OF
THE HOTTEST, DRIEST PLACES ON
EARTH.
VAST AREAS ARE SEMI-ARID DESERT.
THERE ARE NO NATURAL RESOURCES.
THE OFFICIAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
IS 50%.
LIFE FOR MANY IS DIFFICULT.
BUT DJIBOUTI DOES HAVE ONE VERY
VALUABLE ASSET: ITS LOCATION,
WHERE THE RED SEA MEETS THE GULF
OF ADEN-- A CROSSROADS TO THE
SUEZ CANAL, THE PERSIAN GULF,
THE INDIAN OCEAN AND THE EAST
AFRICAN COAST-- STRATEGIC FOR
COUNTRIES FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD THAT HAVE MILITARY
OUTPOSTS HERE.
ENTERING DJIBOUTI'S OLDEST PORT,
YOU GET THE FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE
COUNTRY'S MAIN INDUSTRY.
THAT ENORMOUS SHIP AND A
DOCKSIDE FULL OF CONTAINERS HAS
BEEN THE BLUEPRINT FOR ITS
ECONOMY SINCE GAINING
INDEPENDENCE FROM FRANCE IN
1977.
THIS PORT WAS BUILT BY THE
FRENCH DECADES AGO.
IT HAS SERVED DJIBOUTI WELL,
ESTABLISHING THIS TINY NATION AS
A PLAYER IN THE SHIPPING WORLD.
BUT IT SIMPLY ISN'T BIG ENOUGH
TO MEET THE EVER GROWING DEMAND
AND DJIBOUTI'S AMBITIONS.
ILYAS DAWALEH IS THE COUNTRY'S
FINANCE MINISTER.
>> IN OUR VISION, FROM THE EAST
COAST OF AFRICA, DJIBOUTI MUST
AND SHOULD REMAIN THE LARGEST
AND THE MOST SOPHISTICATED
SERVICE CENTER IN TERMS OF
INTERNATIONAL SHIPPING.
>> Reporter: DJIBOUTI'S SECOND
PORT OPENED NINE YEARS AGO AND
NOW HANDLES NEARLY TWO MILLION
TONS OF CONTAINER CARGO A YEAR.
SEEING THIS MAKES IT EASY TO
UNDERSTAND WHY SHIPPING ACCOUNTS
FOR 80% OF THE ECONOMY.
BUT AN EVEN BIGGER, NEWLY
CONSTRUCTED PORT IS GETTING
READY TO OPEN.
IT'S CONSIDERED ONE OF THE MOST
ADVANCED PORTS IN THE WORLD.
THOSE CRANES REPRESENT THE
LATEST CONTAINER LIFTING
TECHNOLOGY.
CHINA PAID FOR THE MULTIMILLION-
DOLLAR PROJECT THROUGH STATE-
OWNED COMPANIES.
DJIBOUTI'S FINANCE MINISTER SAYS
CHINA IS MORE WILLING THAN
WESTERN COUNTRIES TO TAKE
FINANCIAL RISKS HERE.
>> VERY, VERY, VERY IMPORTANT.
AND WE CAN EVEN CONSIDER IT
REALLY A GAME CHANGER PARTNER.
>> Reporter: DJIBOUTI'S DREAM IS
TO BECOME FOR EAST AFRICA WHAT
SINGAPORE IS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA,
A SHIPPING AND FINANCIAL
POWERHOUSE.
>> WHEN THAT VISION STARTED IN
2000, A LOT OF PEOPLE, THEY WERE
KIND OF LAUGHING.
>> Reporter: ABDIRAHMAN AHMED IS
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH A FOCUS ON
RENEWABLE ENERGY.
HE'S STUDIED AND WORKED ABROAD,
BUT HE'S COME HOME.
>> 15 OR 17 YEARS LATER, THEN
MORE AND MORE PEOPLE ARE NOW
BELIEVING IN IT.
AND THEY ARE SAYING, YES, IT IS
FEASIBLE, AND IT IS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: DJIBOUTI'S LOCATION
PUTS IT AT THE CENTER OF A
MULTINATIONAL FIGHT AGAINST
PIRATES BASED IN NEIGHBORING
SOMALIA AND IN THE WAR ON
TERRORISM.
SINCE 9/11, THE UNITED STATES
HAS CONTINUALLY EXPANDED ITS
TROOP PRESENCE TO FIGHT ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS IN THE REGION.
THE U.S. COMBINED JOINT TASK
FORCE FOR THE HORN OF AFRICA IS
THE MAIN AMERICAN UNIT STATIONED
AT A FORMER FRENCH COLONIAL
MILITARY INSTALLATION.
CAMP LEMONNIER IS THE ONLY U.S.
MILITARY BASE ON THE ENTIRE
CONTINENT OF AFRICA, AND IT IS A
CRITICAL FOOTHOLD IN A
PARTICULARLY UNSTABLE PART OF
AFRICA.
IT IS HOME TO ANYWHERE BETWEEN
2,000 AND 3,000 AMERICAN
MILITARY PERSONNEL.
THE NUMBER OF U.S. TROOPS
DEPLOYED HERE HAS TRIPLED IN THE
PAST 15 YEARS AS THE BASE
EXPANDED TO MORE THAN 600 ACRES.
THE PENTAGON IS NOW SPENDING
$140 MILLION A YEAR IN DJIBOUTI.
NAVY CAPTAIN JAMES BLACK IS THE
BASE COMMANDER.
>> I DESCRIBE IT AS A LANDLOCKED
AIRCRAFT CARRIER OR A LANDLOCKED
AMPHIB.
WE ARE SELF-CONTAINED, DO OUR
OWN WATER, OUR OWN ELECTRICITY,
FEED OUR OWN PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: FOR SECURITY
REASONS, AMERICANS ARE NOT
ALLOWED TO LEAVE THE BASE.
THE TOUR OF DUTY HERE IS
ANYWHERE FROM NINE MONTHS TO A
YEAR.
AND IT'S HOT ALL YEAR, AVERAGING
105 DEGREES IN SUMMER.
SOME OF THE AMENITIES HELP: A
GYM; SUBWAY IS HERE; THERE'S A
SMALL MOVIE THEATER AND A U.S.
POST OFFICE.
CAMP LEMONNIER HAS BECOME A
PENTAGON HUB FOR SENDING SPECIAL
OPERATIONS FORCES TO CONFLICT
ZONES LIKE SOMALIA, LIBYA AND
YEMEN, AND TO OPERATE DRONE
MISSIONS.
SHOWCASING ITS IMPORTANCE, U.S.
DEFENSE SECRETARY JIM MATTIS
VISITED LAST MONTH AND MET WITH
DJIBOUTI'S PRESIDENT, ISMAIL
OMAR GUELLEH, WHO'S NOW SERVING
HIS FOURTH FIVE-YEAR TERM AND
FIRST WELCOMED THE AMERICANS IN
2002.
HIS DECISION TO ALLOW THE U.S.
MILITARY BASE HERE WAS
CONTROVERSIAL.
THIS IS A PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM
NATION IN A PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM
REGION.
THE WEEK AFTER THE MATTIS VISIT,
A CEREMONY AT CAMP LEMONNIER
ILLUSTRATED JUST HOW MANY OTHER
NATIONS HAVE A MILITARY PRESENCE
IN DJIBOUTI.
FRANCE, ITALY AND JAPAN HAVE
BASES HERE.
IN ALL, DJIBOUTI COLLECTS ABOUT
$150 MILLION A YEAR IN RENT.
NOW, ADD CHINA TO THE LIST.
TO PROTECT ITS ECONOMIC
INTERESTS IN THE REGION, CHINA
IS BUILDING ITS FIRST OVERSEAS
MILITARY BASE HERE, ON TRACK TO
BE COMPLETED THIS YEAR.
THAT'S A CHINESE NAVY FRIGATE IN
DJIBOUTI'S HARBOR.
THE CHINESE BASE WILL BE JUST
SEVEN MILES NORTH OF WHERE THE
AMERICANS ARE.
DJIBOUTI'S FOREIGN MINISTER
ADMITS THAT PROXIMITY STARTLED
SOME PEOPLE.
>> SOME FRIENDS CAME TO TELL US,
YOU KNOW, THERE MIGHT BE
CONFLICTING INTERESTS BETWEEN
CHINA AND THE UNITED STATES AND
OTHER COUNTRIES.
BUT WE RESPONDED QUICKLY, SAYING
THAT OUR MOTIVATION IS MAINLY TO
ASSIST AND HELP FRIENDLY
COUNTRIES TO PROTECT THEIR
INTERESTS.
>> Reporter: CHINA WILL PAY
DJIBOUTI $100 MILLION ANNUALLY
TO USE THE PROPERTY.
FROM THE AIR, YOU CAN SEE A
JETTY, HELICOPTER PAD, AT LEAST
20 LARGE BUILDINGS ON A 90-ACRE
PLOT.
THERE ARE RUMORS ON THE STREET
AND IN DIPLOMATIC CIRCLES THAT
EVENTUALLY AS MANY AS 10,000
CHINESE SOLDIERS WILL BE
DEPLOYED HERE.
>> I ALWAYS SAY THAT'S FAKE
NEWS.
OUR AGREEMENT IS VERY CLEAR.
FEW HUNDREDS, JETTY, AND SO ON.
I MEAN, THERE IS NO SUCH BIG
NAVAL FORCE PRESENCE IN
DJIBOUTI.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER LARGE IT
BECOMES, THE CHINESE MILITARY
PRESENCE DOES NOT APPEAR TO BE A
CONCERN TO THE AMERICAN
COMMANDER AT CAMP LEMONNIER.
>> THE FEW TIMES THAT I HAVE
PERSONALLY INTERACTED WITH THE
CHINESE, THEY'VE BEEN EXTREMELY
PROFESSIONAL.
MY PERSONNEL ARE EXTREMELY
AND WE'RE ALL HERE IN A SMALL
SPACE TRYING TO ADVANCE OUR
NATION'S AND OUR WORLD'S
INTERESTS TOGETHER.
AND SO, WE'RE LOOKING FOR
OPPORTUNITIES TO COOPERATE.
>> Reporter: DESPITE ALL THOSE
BASES AND THE BOOMING SHIPPING
INDUSTRY, MANY PEOPLE LIVING IN
IMPOVERISHED AREAS LIKE BALABA,
OUTSIDE THE CAPITAL, SEE VERY
FEW BENEFITS THEMSELVES.
SHEMIS MOHAMMED, WHO SHARES A
SHACK WITH HER SEVEN
GRANDCHILDREN, SAYS SHE AND HER
DAUGHTER CANNOT FIND WORK.
"THERE IS DEVELOPMENT GOING ON,"
SHE SAYS, "BUT IF YOU DON'T KNOW
SOMEONE IN A POSITION TO HELP,
YOU CANNOT GET A JOB."
THE GOVERNMENT ESTIMATES IT WILL
TAKE AT LEAST ANOTHER 20 YEARS
TO SEE ANY SIGNIFICANT CHANGE.
IN THAT ORIGINAL PORT WITH THE
BIG CONTAINER SHIP AND THE
CHINESE FRIGATE, DJIBOUTI
ENVISIONS A VIBRANT WATERFRONT
WITH HOTELS AND A CONVENTION
CENTER, A MAGNET FOR TOURISM.
IT WANTS MORE CRUISE SHIPS THAN
WARSHIPS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TALK OF
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S FIRING OF
F.B.I. DIRECTOR JIM COMEY
DROWNED OUT ALL OTHER POLITICAL
CONVERSATION THIS WEEK.
SOME TRUMP SUPPORTERS SAID THE
PRESIDENT WAS KEEPING HIS
PROMISE TO SHAKE UP WASHINGTON.
SOME TRUMP CRITICS SAID HE WAS
INTERFERING WITH A SERIOUS
INVESTIGATION ABOUT HIM AND NOT
TELLING THE TRUTH FOR HIS
DECISION.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
RAMIFICATIONS IS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JEFF GREENFIELD, WHO'S IN SANTA
BARBARA, CALIFORNIA.
THIS GAVE SOME OF HIS POLITICAL
ALLIES PAUSE THIS WEEK.
>> IT DID.
I THINK WHAT IT MEANS IS THAT
EXACTLY THE ISSUE THAT TRUMP
WANTED TO GET BEHIND THEM, THE
POSSIBILITY OF SOME KIND OF
COLLUSION BETWEEN SOME OF HIS
ASSOCIATES AND THE RUSSIAN, IS
GOING TO INTENSIFY.
INTERESTINGLY, YOU HAD THE
REPUBLICANS ON THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, RICHARD BURR, WORKING
IN TANDEM, BOTH SAYING WE HAVE
TO GET TO THE BOTTOM OF THIS.
I DID NOTICE A STORY THAT I
THINK WE SHOULD PAY MORE
ATTENTION TO THAN WE HAVE: AN
ARM OF THE TREASURY-- I WANT TO
GET THIS RIGHT, IT IS THE
FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT
NETWORK-- IS WORKING WITH THE
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE TO
GIVE THEM INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT
THAT COMMITTEE KNOWS ABOUT
FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THERE IS ANY
SMOKE, MUCH LESS FIRE, BUT IF
THERE IS STUFF BACK THERE THAT'S
GOING TO SHOW SOME KIND OF
FINANCIAL HANKY-PANKY BETWEEN
TRUMP ASSOCIATES AND THE
RUSSIANS, THAT'S THE UNIT OF THE
TREASURY THAT'S BEST EQUIPPED TO
FIND OUT.
SO I THINK WHATEVER TRUMP WANTED
TO DO IN FIRING COMEY, HE MAY
HAVE HAD THE REVERSE EFFECT.
>> WHO IS GOING TO BE A
REPLACEMENT?
WE'VE SAID THAT THE INTERVIEW
PROCESS HAS BEGUN, BUT ONCE THAT
REPLACEMENT IS THERE, WHAT KIND
OF CREDIBILITY CHALLENGES DO
THEY FACE?
>> THIS IS ANOTHER AREA WHERE
TRUMP HAS SET A LANDMINE AND
STEPPED ON IT HIMSELF.
THE FACT THAT HE ASSERTED THAT
THE RUSSIA STORY WAS VERY MUCH
ON HIS MIND WHEN HE FIRED COMEY,
AND HE'S ALREADY SAID PUBLICLY
HE DOESN'T SEE ANYTHING WRONG
WITH TRYING TO EXACT A PLEDGE OF
LOYALTY FROM THE F.B.I.
DIRECTOR, IS GOING TO MEAN THAT
THE CONFIRMATION PROCESS FOR
WHOEVER THAT NEW F.B.I. DIRECTOR
IS IS GOING TO BE VERY INTENSE.
ALONG THOSE LINES, I WANT TO
POINT ONE THING OUT: THE SENATE
JUDICIARY COMMITTEE IS WHERE THE
CONFIRMATION PROCESS BEGINS.
THERE ARE MORE REPUBLICANS THAN
DEMOCRATS ON IT BECAUSE THEY RUN
THE SENATE; BUT THERE ARE THREE
REPUBLICANS ON THE COMMITTEE,
BEN SASS AND JEFF FLAKE AND
LINDSEY GRAHAM, WHO ARE
AMONG THE MOST NON-FANS OF
PRESIDENT TRUMP IN THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, AND MY SENSE
IS THE VETTING PROCESS IS GOING
TO BE VERY, VERY INTERESTING
TO WATCH ONCE THAT NOMINEE,
WHOEVER HE OR SHE IS, GETS
BEFORE THAT COMMITTEE.
>> Woodruff: HOW DOES ALL THIS
PLAY WITH THE BUSINESS OF TRUMP
SUPPORTERS?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW WHAT, HERE WE
GO AGAIN.
WE HAVE SEEN THROUGHOUT THE
CAMPAIGN AND IN THE FIRST FOUR
MONTHS THAT WHATEVER ROILS
WASHINGTON OR THE EDITORIAL
PAGES OF THE NEWSPAPER, TRUMP'S
BASE IS HAPPY WITH WHAT'S HE'S
DOING.
THE GREAT MAJORITY OF
REPUBLICANS THINK HE WAS RIGHT
THE FIRE COMEY.
THIS IS THE BROADER STORY.
WE'RE SO POLARIZED, WE'RE LIKE
WARRING TRIBES; THAT WHOEVER IS
THE HEAD OF MY TEAM, I'M GOING
TO DEFEND COME HELL OR HIGH
WATER.
THE OTHER PART ABOUT THAT IS
THAT THE REPORTING IN THE MEDIA
IS GOING TO HAVE VERY LITTLE
EFFECT ON THAT BASE.
WE'VE LEARNED FROM A RECENT PEW
POLL THAT IF YOU ASK PEOPLE, "DO
YOU THINK THE MEDIA SHOULD ACT
AS WATCHDOGS?," A YEAR AGO,
REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS WERE
EXACTLY THE SAME; THREE-QUARTERS
SAID YES.
NOW, MORE THAN 90% OF DEMOCRATS
SAY YES, AND LESS THAN 50% OF
REPUBLICANS SAY YES.
SO THIS POLARIZATION WILL HELP
DONALD TRUMP WITH HIS BASE.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF
GREENEFIELD, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PENNSYLVANIA'S
ATTORNEY GENERAL IS TRYING TO
ARRANGE FOR AN AMTRAK ENGINEER
WHO DROVE A TRAIN INVOLVED IN A
FATAL CRASH TO SURRENDER AND BE
ARRAIGNED ON CRIMINAL CHARGES.
EIGHT TRAIN PASSENGERS DIED AND
180 WERE INJURED IN THE CRASH IN
PHILADELPHIA TWO YEARS AGO.
A NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION BOARD
INVESTIGATION FOUND ENGINEER
BRANDON BOSTIAN HAD BEEN DRIVING
106 MILES AN HOUR ON A 50 MILE-
AN-HOUR CURVE.
YESTERDAY, BOSTIAN WAS CHARGED
WITH MANSLAUGHTER, RECKLESS
ENDANGERMENT AND RISKING OR
CAUSING A CATASTROPHE.
SEPARATELY, AMTRAK HAS AGREED TO
PAY $265 MILLION TO SETTLE
CLAIMS FROM THE ACCIDENT.
OFFICIALS IN SOUTHERN TURKEY SAY
A TOUR BUS CRASH HAS KILLED AT
LEAST 24 PEOPLE AND INJURED TEN
MORE.
THE BUS FLIPPED OVER ON A
TWISTING MOUNTAIN ROAD AND FELL
OFF A 50-FOOT HIGH CLIFF ONTO A
LOWER SECTION OF THE ROAD AND
STRUCK ANOTHER VEHICLE.
THE BUS WAS CARRYING PEOPLE FROM
IZMIR TO A MOTHER'S DAY EVENT IN
THE SEASIDE RESORT OF MARMARIS.
ALL THE PASSENGERS WERE TURKISH
AND MOST OF THE ACCIDENT VICTIMS
WERE WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
A PORTUGUESE BROTHER AND SISTER
ARE THE NEWEST AND AMONG THE
YOUNGEST SAINTS OF THE CATHOLIC
CHURCH.
500,000 PEOPLE ATTENDED MASS AT
THE FATIMA SHRINE IN PORTUGAL
TODAY AS POPE FRANCIS CANONIZED
FRANCISCO AND JACINTA MARTO.
100 YEARS AGO, THE CHILDREN SAID
A VISION OF THE VIRGIN MARY
FIRST APPEARED TO THEM AS THEY
TENDED THEIR SHEEP.
THE RECOVERY OF A BRAZILIAN BOY
FROM A SEVERE HEAD INJURY IN
2013 AFTER THE BOY'S PARENTS HAD
PRAYED TO THE TWO SHEPHERDS WAS
DEEMED THE MIRACLE NEEDED FOR
THEM TO BE DECLARED SAINTS.
FRANCISCO AND JACINTA WERE ONLY
TEN AND NINE WHEN THEY DIED IN A
FLU EPIDEMIC.
ON THE PLANE RIDE BACK TO ITALY,
POPE FRANCIS SAYS HE WILL NOT
TRY TO CONVINCE PRESIDENT TRUMP
TO SOFTEN HIS POLICIES ON
IMMIGRATION OR THE ENVIRONMENT
WHEN THEY MEET AT THE VATICAN
LATER THIS MONTH.
RETURNING TO NORTH KOREA, JAPAN
AND SOUTH KOREA CONFIRMED THIS
EVENING THAT NORTH KOREA HAS
LAUNCHED AN UNIDENTIFIED
PROJECTILE THAT'S BELIEVED TO BE
A BALLISTIC MISSILE.
SOUTH KOREA'S MILITARY SAYS THE
MISSILE FLEW 435 MILES.
THE TEST COMES JUST DAYS AFTER
SOUTH KOREA INAUGURATED A NEW
PRESIDENT, WHO HAS CALLED FOR A
MODERATE APPROACH TO RELATIONS
BETWEEN THE TWO NATIONS.
TOMORROW ON "PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND," CONSERVATIVE
REPUBLICANS CALLING FOR ACTION
ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.